[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello, and welcome to
the "World of Wisdom."
My name is Linda
Rachel, and I'll
be your host for
the next 30 minutes.
Today we have as our special
guest author Guy Finley.
He has just written
a wonderful book
and shared his insights
in the area of self-help
and self-discovery.
The book is called
"The Intimate Enemy--
Winning the War
Within Yourself."
This book, it has a wonderful
message that all of us
are going to enjoy hearing about
today as we talk to Guy Finley.
Guy, thank you for
coming to join us.
>> I'm happy to be here.
Thank you, Linda.
>> We talk about and an enemy,
the immediate thing that comes
to our mind is war, fighting--
>> Right, right.
>> --getting even, being
right, or being wrong.
What is this intimate enemy?
>> Well, there is within us--
and I don't care who you
are, where you have been,
and what your experiences.
We've all had moments
where from out of our mouth
jumped something that we
didn't want to say to somebody.
Our hand has reached and
pulled out of our pocket money
that we shouldn't spend.
Or maybe it's just been in
the solitude of our own home
when a certain painful
thought or feeling washed over
us and left us feeling sad--
those moments where it's
clear that we didn't
choose to do what we did.
Because everybody knows.
You say something
painful to someone.
Then you go, oh, I'm
sorry, or you feel guilty.
You beat yourself up
for having done that.
Something spoke.
Something made an action
that was defeating
or somehow self-compromising.
Inside of us, we have
a nature whose purpose
is not our best interest.
Look, I need to
be able to think,
to be able to do my work.
But when it comes to
being able to relate
to another human being,
when it comes to a loving
nature, and things like
that, we have another nature
that's intended to be in
the forefront of this.
The intimate enemy is
that part of ourself
that meets life from
this conditioned package
of our own past, who we've
been, and who we hope to be.
We have another
aspect of our nature,
of our life, that
is not conditioned,
that isn't trying
to prove itself
according to who
it thinks it should
be seen as or by other people.
That's the intimate enemy.
And our job as
spiritual individuals
wishing to become a
different kind of person
is to begin catching it,
waking up to its presence,
and, instead of letting
it speak for us,
instead of it letting doing our
thinking for us, to be awake
and aware to its presence.
And then because there
is something inside of us
that is greater than it, wiser
than it, broader than it,
it will begin to put this part
of ourself in its proper place.
You said something.
I hadn't thought about it
quite until you said it,
that we have a nature within
ourself that seems to be at war
and that then we seem
to have this other part.
But, you see, they're
not separate parts.
They're interrelated.
The difference is that,
right now, thought
life, our who we've been,
this physical existence,
it's more dominant than
our spiritual life.
And this book is about
helping the person first
recognize that this reversal is
taking place so that then they
can begin to do the
right kind of inner work,
the right awakening that
will replace and put--
allow the natural relationship
to express itself.
>> Well, do you think that this
is something that we naturally
know that we have a part of us?
Like, for instance,
someone will say, well,
I wonder if she has
a hidden agenda.
Is what you're saying
is that we have
our own hidden agenda that we
aren't consciously aware of?
>> That's right.
There is something in
us, 24 hours a day,
that is perpetrating and
perpetuating its agenda.
And its agenda is the seemingly
safe and secure continuation
of our presently known
sense of ourself.
Who we really are does not
need to think about itself
to know itself.
It doesn't have to be
approved or disapproved
to feel good or feel bad.
So, yes, we are a hidden-agenda
machine that defeats itself
as often as it helps itself.
And our task is to
wake up to this process
because the very awareness
of this nature that
operates in our unawareness
changes our relationship
with it.
>> Well, it seems that in our
society today that the way we
approach solving problems
is to always blame.
It's the other person.
It's the other guy.
It's their fault. They're
making me feel this way.
>> That's it.
That's it.
>> And so what you're saying is
that this is the reverse of how
we should be looking
at solutions.
>> One of the most powerful
spiritual exercises
on the surface of the
earth, or in any universe,
is if a man or a woman would
simply, just as an experiment,
try to spend 24 hours without
blaming anyone or complaining
about anything.
You know what would happened?
They would start to become
conscious of the fact
that there is that wish on their
part to act out what they know
is true, while
within them dwells
an entirely other new,
different kind of creature that
can't wait to lash out
at someone or something
or convince itself that the
reason it feels the way it does
is because of what's
happening outside of us.
As long as you and
I, or anyone else,
continue to find our sense of
self from anything exterior
to ourselves, we
will remain not only
the victim of the
moment in which we're
finding that sense of
ourself but addicted
to continuing to find solutions
to what we say is the problem.
It is an inner
battle, and that's
where we have to do the work.
>> Well, a lot of times, if
we are trying to say, oh--
if we say, OK, today I am
not going to blame anyone.
Today I will not be judgemental.
What happens when we do that?
>> You know what happens.
>> It's like what you had said
earlier about in the Bible
about Paul, that he
recognized this in himself.
The things that he didn't want
to do he found himself doing.
>> --doing.
I have a phrase.
It goes, two steps forward and
three steps back, but so what?
Two steps forward and three
steps back, but so what?
Oh, there's so
much to talk about.
Look, I say one day
to myself, you know,
yesterday, I was at work.
And I watched old
Bill over there.
And he was staring at me out
of the corner of his eye,
and he was whispering
to my superior.
And I'm sure he's
trying to sink my ship.
And what happens?
You sit there at
your desk, and it's
boil, boil, toil and
trouble, this churning
going on inside of you.
And now your whole day is in,
what-- relationship with a fear
that itself is
trying to figure out
how to get Bill to see the light
and then straighten out people
that Bill may not even
have talked to about you.
You know what I'm saying?
So they really
think you're nuts.
When if you were awake
to it, you could say,
OK, you know, tomorrow
when I go to work,
with God as my witness, I'm
going to have my own life.
That's the aim
because I understand
I don't have my own life
when Bill's directing it.
It's not even Bill.
It's my thoughts about him.
Right?
So I sit there, and I say,
I'm not going to do it.
And what happens?
Boil, boil, toil and trouble.
The energy starts.
I started getting upset.
And in spite of
myself, like Paul said,
I don't do the
good I want to do.
I do the evil I don't, and
I'm out there fighting again.
But listen to this.
Something else has happened.
I have awakened
for a split second
and tasted the fact that there
is my will to do what is true.
And within me there
is another will
that wants to serve itself.
Oh, what a moment.
You know why?
Because it awakens
inside of a person
something I don't have a--
I call it spiritual intolerance,
when I will no longer put up
with one part of
myself that wants
to pursue the ends that punish
me and everyone else around me.
Did you ever see the
movie "High Noon?"
>> Yes.
>> What a great film.
Because at the end, when he
was sure he was going to die,
he went out to
face the bad guys.
And by his very act of
courage, the townspeople
that had abandoned him took
his side, and he won the day.
When you and I are sure that
of ourselves we cannot do
something but will nevertheless
resolve and stand up to that
which is defeating us,
God himself, truth itself,
the light, Christ,
whatever word, it comes in.
It takes your side.
And it knocks all
the bad guys down.
And you stand there,
and you realize,
I have found the secret of life.
I've been afraid
of being defeated,
when the answer was not
to run from the battle
but to go into it
deliberately to find out
what happens to
me when I do what
is true for the sake of truth.
And wait until you do.
I mean, that's the greatest
thing in the world.
>> So actually by just stopping
and recognizing who this enemy
is, or what this enemy is,
or what this thought is,
that is half the battle.
>> At least half the
battle, maybe 90%,
simply learning to
have a new priority.
Our priorities now all have
to do with our physical life.
I don't care what people say.
What can I do to get more,
to be more, have more, be
seen by more?
On and on it goes.
When I can start
recognizing that--
Vernon Howard, this man I
once knew, a great teacher.
he said, it is wise to seek
immortality because time
defeats all other ambitions.
And when I can start really
getting the drift of that,
my priorities are
going to change.
I can want to be awake
sitting here more
than I want to be approved of.
I can want to be connected
to something higher
more than I want to
get someplace faster--
endless opportunities for me to
change my relationship in life
and, by doing so,
changing not only
my experience but
my actual nature.
>> So immortality
actually begins now.
>> I have another saying.
It's now or never.
>> Now or never.
Well, as we look
at who we are, one
of the things that you
talk about in the book
is the fact that we
have multiple selves
and like many, many voices
that are there talking to us
and giving us
different messages.
How do we know which
of these selves
is giving us the
correct message?
>> There is actually a way.
But everything begins
with intention.
Everything begins with our wish
to be a more whole human being.
And then as that wish
comes to be more whole,
from it comes the
discovery that we're not.
Look, you know, if you talk--
who would be the most
insane human being?
The sickest human
being on the surface
the earth would be the
one who is convinced
that he didn't have a problem.
Right?
So in proportion to
my ability to start
waking up to the fact that
one minute I am this person.
The next minute I'm that person.
Then I go to church.
I'm this person.
And I'm all these various
people in some kind
of constant scramble
for my mouth.
That very awareness begins to
produce a kind of unification
in me.
But more important
than that is that,
in my awareness of
this divisive nature,
I start to long for
something that isn't divided.
Rather than find myself in one
temporary person after the next
and one temporary
pursuit and purpose,
I start to long for a
purpose and a person
within myself that isn't so
divided and outwardly driven.
>> Well, we'll come right back
in just a moment and continue
with these wonderful insights as
we share about your great book,
"The Intimate Enemy."
>> Thank you.
>> Hello.
I'm Linda Rachel, and we're with
the "World of Wisdom" today.
And Guy Finley, the
author of the new book
"The Intimate Enemy--
The War Within
Us," is here today.
Would you tell us a little
bit more about this war
that we have inside of us--
is we all experience
painful things
in our lives or painful
experiences or problems.
How is it that we can break
away from these patterns
that we continually follow
that causes these problems?
>> One of the things that is
in my new book that I think is
perhaps the least understood
and, on the opposite side,
the most powerful thing a person
could come to understand is
that the things that drive
us through these negative,
I call them, circles of self
have to do with the advent
of a painful thought or
feeling that comes to us.
I'm sitting at home,
and I'm 35 years old.
I swore, when I was 18, I'd have
$1 million by the time I was 30
or that I'd be
this or the other.
And I'm sitting there,
and all of a sudden,
oh, you know, you're nothing.
Look at you.
You haven't got two farthings.
No one loves you.
And no one sees
your-- and who doesn't
think they're brilliant?
No one understands you,
so forth and so on.
Here comes this painful state.
Right?
Everyone can understand that.
I'm alone now.
I'm going to be alone
for the rest of my life.
What do we do when that
negative state comes?
The minute that
painful energy gets
in there, all caused,
incidentally, by thought,
what happens?
I begin to see a new future.
Tomorrow I'm going
to start over.
I'm going to work harder.
I'm going to lose 50 pounds.
I'm going to, God help
me, get plastic surgery.
I'm going to do this.
I'm going to do that.
So this negative thought, this
seed thought, this energy,
produces a future for me in
which I will not be suffering
from what I'm suffering from.
And I begin to feel the
promise and the goodness
of what I think will be coming.
But if we're honest at all,
we never get to that moment.
And even if we do, it's
hopelessly incomplete,
meaning that I'm just visited
by something else that tells me,
well, the next
thing I have to do
is this, that, and the other.
Listen to this completely
different answer.
The negative state,
the energy, is
produced by the thoughts
and feelings that
have come into me because
I have compared myself
to who I wanted to
be, which is a divided
thought in the first place.
Those energies have
no real life outside
of what I give to them
in my unconsciousness.
My awareness of the fact
that these negative thoughts
and feelings and the
energies that they produce,
as subtle as they may be and as
deep or powerful as they seem
to be, that they
have no life outside
of the mechanical moment
in which they were produced
allows me to start
doing something I've
never done before.
I can sit there in my home.
And this is an old--
I go, darkness, I
laugh in your face.
And I can actually
challenge them
by applying the truth of
what I know about them
instead of allowing those
negative states to tell me
who I am and how
to get out of them.
That painful state, Linda--
and everyone has to try this to
discover the strength in it--
it comes, and it goes.
It will reach a certain
point, a pitch where you think
it's the end of your life.
And listen to this.
It is the end of your life.
It's the end of that
life that belonged
to the intimate enemy
whose pursuit starts
with a punishment,
winds up with a promise,
and yet never goes
anywhere except around
and around and around.
The discovery that
negative states
have no life outside
of the one we give them
and our willingness to
challenge them out on that basis
shows us that internally
there is an ocean,
and there are waves.
We've been taking
ourself as the waves.
But when we can begin to
recognize that the waves, what
they are, and how they
behave, and let them go,
suddenly there is a new kind
of awareness within ourselves
of something that's more
permanent, something more
eternal, and God,
and, wonderfully,
something that isn't that kind
of endless punishment born out
of the pursuit of
some new promise.
>> Well, I have a friend who
has a problem with her weight.
And one day I was talking to
her and saying, you look fine.
You look like-- she
says, no, I don't.
She says, this is reality.
Reality is that I'm overweight,
and I look terrible.
And that's the way
I'm going to feel,
and nothing you're going to
say is going to change my mind.
So in other words,
her perception
colored what was reality,
and it was reality for her.
>> Look, first of all, you
couldn't be more right.
God help us, men
and women alike,
we look in these magazines.
We see these TV shows.
And I have my background
is in show business.
When I was in my 20s, you
know I came from that world.
These men and women that
these other men and women
are idolizing, they're,
every one of them, virtually
a wreck--
can't stand themselves,
can't walk by a mirror
without looking in it.
But here's the real point.
The punishment that comes
with looking at myself
and then feeling bad about the
way I look because, in my mind,
I've got a picture over
here and it doesn't match,
that's never going to give me
the impetus to lose the weight.
If you ever hear somebody
say, you know what?
I'm overweight, and
I feel terrible,
meaning that it's
uncomfortable for me
to carry around
this weight, there's
the beginning of something
that not only would be natural
for them to lose the
weight, but they would have
the genuine need behind it.
The picture of myself as
being someone who is too heavy
is replaced by a
picture of myself
in Tahiti, which is replaced
by a picture of myself
as the president of a
Fortune 500 company.
So those wants, they're
replaced just like that.
The need to be a different human
being, no matter what level it
is, from physical all
the way to spiritual,
that's a real basis by which
a person can produce change.
And that's what my book does.
It produces the need to become a
different order of human being.
>> Well, one of the things that
you talk about in your book,
it's that we need to have
inside-out thinking--
>> Well said.
>> --rather than the
other way around.
>> Right.
>> But it's confusing to think
that we need to come inside
to look inside.
But yet, on the other hand,
you say in one part of the book
that very few of us really have
conversations or communication
with other people, where it's
because we're so "I" centered.
So how do you resolve that?
>> Yeah.
We're sitting down at the dinner
table, and we're not listening.
We're waiting for
the person to finish
so we can say what's so clever.
God willing, we
should be clever.
Look, we can do it,
you and I right now.
What better way than by example?
We come awake.
We bring ourselves
right into this moment,
even though there's
cameras around us
and all that business.
We just come.
We bring ourselves
into the room.
And when we are
aware of ourselves,
that awareness precludes
the activity of thought.
Now, the moment that
awareness comes in and thought
is momentarily
encompassed, it's not
going to get rid of thought.
But, instead, thought
will now be that which
passes through this awareness.
Before, I was identified
with every single thought
that passed through me.
So when I wake up for a second
and I come aware of myself,
I can watch the quality of
the content of these thoughts
and feelings as
they come through.
>> This awakening process
is something that goes
on for our entire life.
It never ends.
>> There's no end to it.
You just said one of my
very favorite things.
This is the most exciting
thing in the world
when a man or a woman stumbles
onto a real, true way.
They begin to understand
the whole of life.
And I mean this from
the bottom of my heart.
The whole of life is
there just for them.
I mean, everything,
every split second
was created just for you.
And if we had time, I
could prove that to you,
that every man and
woman on the earth
is the center of the universe.
Because God made
them that way so
that they could have
the lessons that only
they could have in those
moments that everything
had to cooperate
to bring to them.
And yet everyone can
have those lessons.
It's fantastic.
>> Well, I really hope that
as you continue going across
the country, and speaking in
these workshops and seminars,
and talking about your books
that people will be able
to look inward--
>> Yes.
>> --to be able to see
what it is that they need.
So regardless of how
many books that we read,
and this is a wonderful
one, I might add,
and I hope that our
audience will read
this, "The Intimate Enemy--
Winning the War
Within Yourself,"
that even though we read these
books that it is something
we have to decide within
ourselves that we want.
>> We must do the work.
We must do the work now,
and now, and now, and now,
endlessly.
>> And that is the
wisdom of Guy Finley.
And I think it's the wisdom
that we are all searching for.
>> I hope so.
>> Thank you for joining us
on the "World of Wisdom."
Come back again, where we will
join authors and our leading
thinkers of the day.
Thank you.
My name's Linda Rachel.